How about stereotypical characters?
They become stereotypes
because we have
the same impression of them.
For example,
the prostitute with a golden heart
has become a stereotype.
This is what we encounter
in many plays and films today.
Not all--
They become stereotypes
because we create the impression
that all characters
like that are similar.
In the tradition of showing that kind
of character, a writer will say,
"No, I'll create a prostitute who's like this."
I'll make her a witch.
So she'll create distinct traits
for the prostitute
to first change the perception
of others on that character
while being integral to her story.
That's where you'll see
how the character will react
because you gave
her various traits
that could either ruin
or give her a chance
to get what she wants.
When that's clear,
the character will seem complex
and not just because
she thinks a certain way.
The problem with stereotypical characters
is that their decision
and response to a situation
become stereotypical as well.
What'll break that impression
is if you give them unique traits
which could trigger
a different response
to the situation
you put them in.
That's easy to say,
of course
but you're facing up to...
Like what Jmee said,
she grew up in 2018
where there are so many shows,
so many films, so many plays
that if you made one of these,
you'll think it's original
but the audience will say,
"I've already seen that!"
So should you be original?
Or should you tweak it,
or ride with it?
Or can you revise
an existing work?
In music, there are only eight notes.
But look how much music
humanity has created.
I guess it's also similar
to making a play or
writing a story.
Some say there are
actually only 52 plotlines
or story configurations
that could ever happen.
But how many stories
have we got?
How many folktales
have been told?
How many plays
have been created?
It won't add to the originality
of your character
if you know your character
inside and out
as though she were a living person.
For me, it doesn’t really
make so much sense.
In the first place,
I'm not Frankenstein
to create people.
For what?
I have a story to tell.
That doesn’t mean
you’re going to use
stereotypical characters,
or cardboard characters.
What I'm saying is,
the character will be
fleshed out eventually,
her personality will emerge
when you put her in a situation,
when you see how she'll react.
So again, what's her objective?
and what's hindering
that objective?
You'll provide all of those
It's like you're fighting
with yourself.
You want the character to win,
but you're also laying out the traps
So she doesn't achieve it.
It's also you who'll dictate
if she gets what she wants or not,
after you weigh out her capacities.
Is she Superwoman to carry the world?
Or is she just a kid
who simply wants
to win the elocution contest?
That's what'll dictate your story.
Do you have questions?
May: This is always my problem
when I'm writing characters
especially with using stereotypes.
How do you make
a stereotypical character work?
RV: In Nick Joaquin's plays,
because I had the honor of writing
the introduction to his plays,
when I was reading his plays,
I noticed that he was actually
using stereotypical characters,
but putting them
in different situations
and making them react differently
from how we would normally expect
from such a stereotypical character.
There are two old maids in "Larawan."
Usually, the stereotypical objective
of two old maids is to find a husband,
even if late in life.
But then he put them in a situation
where they needed to work,
they had to take care
of their dying father,
and then there’s this painting
that’s becoming such a big burden to them.
And so they started to solve
all these obstacles along the way.
While in "Tatarin,"
there's the stereotypical
hysterical woman
who came to town,
who went wild and so on.
But then you realize,
he wants to say something
to patriarchal society.
There's also the prostitute
with a golden heart
who seems like a gold-digger,
but actually isn't.
In effect, during this time,
of course, when you release it now
there's a bit of stereotyping
because a lot of people
have done that in the past.
But Nick probably broke it
during his time.
I think there are many strategies
approaching that.
One is when you break
the expectations of the audience
about a stereotypical character.
Let's say a gay man
dressing up as a woman.
How do you go about breaking
the stereotypical expectation?
A stereotype will work
as a stereotype
if you fulfill the expectation
of the one watching.
You'll break that
and create a new character
if you don't do what they expect.
Migy: Will it not run counter--
won't they question
how realistic it should be?
"It should be like this
in real life, not like that."
How do we approach that?
RV: No, because you still need
to find a way to make it believable.
It means you have to set it up.
For example,
the stereotypical character...
the gay man who dresses up
as a woman.
What's the stereotypical notion of that?
He's weak.
But then there are other characters
who are able to defend themselves.
There's the Thai boxer.
The beautiful boxer.
It means the character himself
breaks his stereotypical image.
Because the stereotypical quality
of any character
is buttressed on the expectation
of the audience.
Actually, with what you're saying,
not all unconventional characters are like that,
and this could happen
if the situation is like this.
You can look at it as though
your character is some sort of routine.
For example,
What's your routine
in the morning?
When you wake up?
- Drink a glass of water right away.
Water right away?
And then?
- I wash my face.
- Take a bath.
You don’t eat first?
The meal and bath, depends.
So it could be either?
But the first thing is water?
- And then wash my face.
The routine of this character is
when he wakes up,
he's still groggy
and then heads to the sink
to drink water.
After that, he'll go to the bathroom,
wash his face
and then take a bath.
How to break the routine is,
when you wake up in the morning
there's no water
or when he opens the faucet
mud comes out.
"What's that?"
Like that.
Migy: In stereotypical characters,
it’s the situation
that the writers are putting them in,
they will change the entire character.
Probably the situation,
that’s one strategy.
Another situation is how
they will react to that situation.
In fact, most plays with
post-modern tendencies
use stereotypical characters.
Then they're placed in an off-putting situation
so they clash with the whole situation.
Like putting
a Sandra Dee character
in a punk situation
which may be funny
but at the same time
it breaks certain
stereotypical expectations.
There are plenty of strategies.
There's one where you have
to change the character inside and out.
The character's pulling a cutesy Sandra Dee
because she's actually a robber.
That's another way of creating a break
in the stereotypical image.
What you did is you changed her occupation.
Situations like that
where you put them there
and see their reactions
are ways of breaking that stereotype.
And there're so many ways.
But then again
you also have to bear in mind
that stereotypical qualities
become stereotypical in time.
The more times you use it,
the more they become stereotypical.
And then the more reason
for you to break them.
Sometimes it reverts back
because the audience hasn't seen
the old stereotype for a while
That's why there are remakes
and the nostalgia.